.TH USB-CREATOR 1 "July 2026" "usb-creator 0.11.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
usb-creator \- create verified bootable USB installers for Linux and BSD
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B usb-creator
.RI [ command ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B usb-creator
downloads the latest installer image for a curated set of Linux and BSD
systems, verifies it against the project's official checksums and \(em
where the project publishes them \(em GPG signatures with pinned key
fingerprints, writes it to a USB device with
.BR dd (1)
semantics, and verifies the write by reading the device back.
.PP
It refuses to write to any disk that backs a mounted system path
.RB ( / ,
.BR /boot ,
.BR /efi ,
.BR /home ,
swap, ...) or belongs to an imported ZFS pool; no option overrides this.
Run without a command, it starts an interactive wizard that asks for a
system category (desktop or server), the image, and the target device.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B list
List candidate USB devices (whole removable disks only).
.TP
.B distros
List the supported systems, grouped by desktop and server.
.TP
.BI info " distro"
Resolve the latest release: filename, URL, checksum, and how it will be
verified. Performs signed-checksum verification where applicable.
.TP
.BI download " distro"
Download the image into the cache and verify it. Cached images are
reused when their checksum still matches.
.TP
.B write
Write an image to a USB device (see OPTIONS).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-distro " name"
Download (or reuse the cached copy of) the named system's image.
.TP
.BI \-\-iso " file"
Use a local image file instead of a downloaded one.
.TP
.BI \-\-device " dev"
Target whole-disk device, e.g.
.IR /dev/sdb .
.TP
.BR \-\-yes ", " \-y
Skip the interactive confirmation. Requires an explicit
.BR \-\-device .
.TP
.B \-\-force
Allow non-removable disks. Disks backing the running system remain
blocked unconditionally.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-verify
Skip the post-write read-back verification.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-gpg
Skip GPG signature verification. Checksums are still enforced.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show usage.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version.
.SH VERIFICATION MODEL
Checksums and signatures are only trusted from infrastructure the
respective project controls; third-party mirrors may serve image bytes
but never the expectation those bytes are checked against. GPG keys are
kept in a private keyring under the cache directory \(em the user's own
GnuPG setup is never touched \(em and a signature by any key other than
the pinned fingerprint fails the download. Systems whose upstream
publishes no integrity data at all (e.g. Omarchy) are marked loudly as
TLS-only. See
.I docs/ARCHITECTURE.md
in the source distribution for the full trust table.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B USB_CREATOR_CACHE
Override the cache directory (default:
.IR $XDG_CACHE_HOME/usb\-creator ,
falling back to
.IR ~/.cache/usb\-creator ).
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable all colored output.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cache/usb\-creator
Downloaded images and the private GnuPG keyring.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success, 1 on any error or refused write.
.SH EXAMPLES
Interactive wizard:
.PP
.nf
.RS
usb-creator
.RE
.fi
.PP
Write the latest Debian netinst, non-interactively:
.PP
.nf
.RS
usb-creator write --distro debian --device /dev/sdb --yes
.RE
.fi
.PP
Write a local image:
.PP
.nf
.RS
usb-creator write --iso ~/isos/custom.iso --device /dev/sdb
.RE
.fi
.PP
Check what "latest" resolves to without downloading:
.PP
.nf
.RS
usb-creator info arch
.RE
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dd (1),
.BR lsblk (8),
.BR gpg (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Gorm Reventlow <gorm@reventlow.com>
.br
https://github.com/Reventlow/usb-creator
